Adopt an individualised approach to diabetes care that is tailored to the needs and circumstances of adults with type 2 diabetes, taking into account their personal preferences, comorbidities, risks from polypharmacy, and their ability to benefit from long-term interventions because of reduced life expectancy.
Such an approach is especially important in the context of multimorbidity.
Reassess the person's needs and circumstances at each review and think about whether to stop any medicines that are not effective.
Take into account any disabilities, including visual impairment, when planning and delivering care for adults with type 2 diabetes.
Offer structured education to adults with type 2 diabetes and/or their family members or carers (as appropriate) at and around the time of diagnosis, with annual reinforcement and review.
Explain to people and their carers that structured education is an integral part of diabetes care.
Ensure that any structured education programme for adults with type 2 diabetes includes the following components: It is evidence-based, and suits the needs of the person. It has specific aims and learning objectives, and supports the person and their family members and carers in developing attitudes, beliefs, knowledge and skills to self-manage diabetes. It has a structured curriculum that is theory-driven, evidence-based and resource-effective, has supporting materials, and is written down. It is delivered by trained educators who have an understanding of educational theory appropriate to the age and needs of the person, and who are trained and competent to deliver the principles and content of the programme. It is quality assured, and reviewed by trained, competent, independent assessors who measure it against criteria that ensure consistency. The outcomes are audited regularly.
Ensure the patient-education programme provides the necessary resources to support the educators, and that educators are properly trained and given time to develop and maintain their skills. 
Offer group education programmes as the preferred option. Provide an alternative of equal standard for a person unable or unwilling to participate in group education.
Ensure that the patient-education programmes available meet the cultural, linguistic, cognitive and literacy needs within the local area. 
Ensure that all members of the diabetes healthcare team are familiar with the patient-education programmes available locally, that these programmes are integrated with the rest of the care pathway, and that adults with type 2 diabetes and their family members or carers (as appropriate) have the opportunity to contribute to the design and provision of local programmes.
Provide individualised and ongoing nutritional advice from a healthcare professional with specific expertise and competencies in nutrition.
Provide dietary advice in a form sensitive to the person's needs, culture and beliefs, being sensitive to their willingness to change and the effects on their quality of life.
Emphasise advice on healthy balanced eating that is applicable to the general population when providing advice to adults with type 2 diabetes.
Encourage high-fibre, low-glycaemic-index sources of carbohydrate in the diet, such as fruit, vegetables, wholegrains and pulses; include low-fat dairy products and oily fish; and control the intake of foods containing saturated and trans fatty acids.
Integrate dietary advice with a personalised diabetes management plan, including other aspects of lifestyle modification, such as increasing physical activity and losing weight.
For adults with type 2 diabetes who are overweight, set an initial body weight loss target of 5–10%.
Remember that lesser degrees of weight loss may still be of benefit, and that larger degrees of weight loss in the longer term will have advantageous metabolic impact.
Individualise recommendations for carbohydrate and alcohol intake, and meal patterns.
Reducing the risk of hypoglycaemia should be a particular aim for a person using insulin or an insulin secretagogue.
Advise adults with type 2 diabetes that limited substitution of sucrose-containing foods for other carbohydrate in the meal plan is allowable, but that they should take care to avoid excess energy intake.
Discourage the use of foods marketed specifically for people with diabetes.
When adults with type 2 diabetes are admitted to hospital as inpatients or to any other care setting, implement a meal planning system that provides consistency in the carbohydrate content of meals and snacks.
For recommendations on lifestyle advice, see the NICE guidelines on: preventing excess weight gain, weight management, obesity, physical activity, smoking: brief interventions and referrals, stop smoking services, smoking: harm reduction, and smoking: acute, maternity and mental health services. 
Measure blood pressure at least annually in an adult with type 2 diabetes without previously diagnosed hypertension or renal disease.
Offer and reinforce preventive lifestyle advice. 
For an adult with type 2 diabetes on antihypertensive drug treatment when diabetes is diagnosed, review blood pressure control and medications used.
Make changes only if there is poor control or if current drug treatment is not appropriate because of microvascular complications or metabolic problems.
Add medications if lifestyle advice does not reduce blood pressure to below 140/80 mmHg (below 130/80 mmHg if there is kidney, eye or cerebrovascular damage). 
Monitor blood pressure every 1–2 months, and intensify therapy if the person is already on antihypertensive drug treatment, until the blood pressure is consistently below 140/80 mmHg (below 130/80 mmHg if there is kidney, eye or cerebrovascular damage).
First-line antihypertensive drug treatment should be a once-daily, generic angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitor.
Exceptions to this are people of African or Caribbean family origin, or women for whom there is a possibility of becoming pregnant.
The first-line antihypertensive drug treatment for a person of African or Caribbean family origin should be an ACE inhibitor plus either a diuretic or a generic calcium-channel blocker. 
A calcium-channel blocker should be the first-line antihypertensive drug treatment for a woman for whom, after an informed discussion, it is agreed there is a possibility of her becoming pregnant
For a person with continuing intolerance to an ACE inhibitor (other than renal deterioration or hyperkalaemia), substitute an angiotensin II-receptor antagonist for the ACE inhibitor.
Do not combine an ACE inhibitor with an angiotensin II-receptor antagonist to treat hypertension. 
If the person's blood pressure is not reduced to the individually agreed target with first-line therapy, add a calcium-channel blocker or a diuretic (usually a thiazide or thiazide-related diuretic).
Add the other drug (that is, the calcium-channel blocker or diuretic) if the target is not reached with dual therapy.
If the person's blood pressure is not reduced to the individually agreed target with triple therapy, add an alpha-blocker, a beta-blocker or a potassium-sparing diuretic (the last with caution if the person is already taking an ACE inhibitor or an angiotensin II-receptor antagonist).
Monitor the blood pressure of a person who has attained and consistently remained at his or her blood pressure target every 4–6 months.
Check for possible adverse effects of antihypertensive drug treatment – including the risks from unnecessarily low blood pressure.
Do not offer antiplatelet therapy (aspirin or clopidogrel) for adults with type 2 diabetes without cardiovascular disease.
Use methods to measure HbA1c that have been calibrated according to International Federation of Clinical Chemistry (IFCC) standardisation.
Investigate unexplained discrepancies between HbA1c and other glucose measurements.
Seek advice from a team with specialist expertise in diabetes or clinical biochemistry.
Involve adults with type 2 diabetes in decisions about their individual HbA1c target.
Encourage them to achieve the target and maintain it unless any resulting adverse effects (including hypoglycaemia), or their efforts to achievetheir target, impair their quality of life. 
For adults with type 2 diabetes managed either by lifestyle and diet, or by lifestyle and diet combined with a single drug not associated with hypoglycaemia, support the person to aim for an HbA1c level of 48 mmol/mol(6.5%).
For adults on a drug associated with hypoglycaemia, support the person to aim for an HbA1c level of 53 mmol/mol (7.0%).
In adults with type 2 diabetes, if HbA1c levels are not adequately controlled by a single drug and rise to 58 mmol/mol (7.5%) or higher: reinforce advice about diet, lifestyle and adherence to drug treatment and support the person to aim for an HbA1c level of 53 mmol/mol (7.0%) and intensify drug treatment.
If adults with type 2 diabetes achieve an HbA1c level that is lower than their target and they are not experiencing hypoglycaemia, encourage them to maintain it.
Be aware that there are other possible reasons for a low HbA1c level, for example, deteriorating renal function or sudden weight loss. 
If adults with type 2 diabetes achieve an HbA1c level that is lower than their target and they are not experiencing hypoglycaemia, encourage them to maintain it.
Be aware that there are other possible reasons for a low HbA1c level, for example, deteriorating renal function or sudden weight loss. 
Do not routinely offer self-monitoring of blood glucose levels for adults with type 2 diabetes unless: the person is on insulin or there is evidence of hypoglycaemic episodes or the person is on oral medication that may increase their risk of hypoglycaemia while driving or operating machinery or the person is pregnant, or is planning to become pregnant. 
Consider short-term self-monitoring of blood glucose levels in adults with type 2 diabetes (and review treatment as necessary): when starting treatment with oral or intravenous corticosteroids or to confirm suspected hypoglycaemia.
Think about a diagnosis of gastroparesis in adults with type 2 diabetes with erratic blood glucose control or unexplained gastric bloating or vomiting, taking into account possible alternative diagnoses.
For adults with type 2 diabetes who have vomiting caused by gastroparesis, explain that: there is not strong evidence that any available antiemetic therapy is effective some people have had benefit with domperidone[11], erythromycin[12] or metoclopramide[13].
the strongest evidence for effectiveness is for domperidone[11], but prescribers must take into account its safety profile, in particular its cardiac risk and potential interactions with other medicines.
For treating vomiting caused by gastroparesis in adults with type 2 diabetes: consider alternating use of erythomycin[12] and metoclopramide[13] consider domperidone[11] only in exceptional circumstances (if domperidone is the only effective treatment) and in accordance with MHRA guidance.
If gastroparesis is suspected, consider referral to specialist services if: the differential diagnosis is in doubt or persistent or severe vomiting occurs.
For guidance on managing painful diabetic peripheral neuropathy in adults with type 2 diabetes, see the NICE guideline on neuropathic pain in adults.
Think about the possibility of contributory sympathetic nervous system damage for adults with type 2 diabetes who lose the warning signs of hypoglycaemia.
Think about the possibility of autonomic neuropathy affecting the gut in adults with type 2 diabetes who have unexplained diarrhoea that happens particularly at night.
When using tricyclic drugs and antihypertensive drug treatments in adults with type 2 diabetes who have autonomic neuropathy, be aware of the increased likelihood of side effects such as orthostatic hypotension.
Investigate the possibility of autonomic neuropathy affecting the bladder in adults with type 2 diabetes who have unexplained bladder-emptying problems.
In managing autonomic neuropathy symptoms, include specific interventions indicated by the manifestations (for example, for abnormal sweating or nocturnal diarrhoea).
For guidance on preventing and managing foot problems in adults with type 2 diabetes, see the NICE guideline on diabetic foot problems.
For guidance on managing kidney disease in adults with type 2 diabetes, see the NICE guideline on chronic kidney disease in adults.
Offer men with type 2 diabetes the opportunity to discuss erectile dysfunction as part of their annual review.
Assess, educate and support men with type 2 diabetes who have problematic erectile dysfunction, addressing contributory factors such as cardiovascular disease as well as possible treatment options.
Consider a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor to treat problematic erectile dysfunction in men with type 2 diabetes, initially choosing the drug with the lowest acquisition cost and taking into account any contraindications.
Following discussion, refer men with type 2 diabetes to a service offering other medical, surgical or psychological management of erectile dysfunction if treatment (including a phosphodiesterase-5 inhibitor, as appropriate) has been unsuccessful.
On diagnosis, GPs should immediately refer adults with type 2 diabetes to the local eye screening service.
Perform screening as soon as possible and no later than 3 months from referral.
Arrange repeat structured eye screening annually.
Explain the reasons for, and success of, eye screening systems to adults with type 2 diabetes, so that attendance is not reduced by lack of knowledge or fear of outcome.
Use mydriasis with tropicamide when photographing the retina, after prior informed agreement following discussion of the advantages and disadvantages. 
Discussions should include precautions for driving.
Use a quality-assured digital retinal photography programme using appropriately trained staff.
Perform visual acuity testing as a routine part of eye screening programmes.
Depending on the findings, follow structured eye screening by: routine review in 1 year or earlier review or referral to an ophthalmologist.
Arrange emergency review by an ophthalmologist for: sudden loss of vision rubeosis iridis pre-retinal or vitreous haemorrhage retinal detachment.
Arrange rapid review by an ophthalmologist for new vessel formation.
Refer to an ophthalmologist in accordance with the National Screening Committee criteria and timelines if any of these features are present: referable maculopathy: exudate or retinal thickening within 1 disc diameter of the centre of the fovea circinate or group of exudates within the macula (the macula is defined here as a circle centred on the fovea, with a diameter the distance between the temporal border of the optic disc and the fovea) any microaneurysm or haemorrhage within 1 disc diameter of the centre of the fovea, only if associated with deterioration of best visual acuity to 6/12 or worse. referable pre-proliferative retinopathy (if cotton wool spots are present, look carefully for the following features, but cotton wool spots themselves do not define pre-proliferative retinopathy): any venous beading any venous reduplication any intraretinal microvascular abnormalities multiple deep, round or blot haemorrhages. any large, sudden unexplained drop in visual acuity. 
